data/workshop/exercise3.mdx, before:

---
title: Scaling and self-healing applications
exercise: 3
date: '2023-12-06'
tags: ['openshift','containers','kubernetes','deployments','autoscaling']
draft: false
authors: ['default']
summary: "Let's scale our application up 📈"
---

We have our application deployed, let's scale it up to make sure it will be resilient to failures.

While **Services** provide discovery and load balancing for **Pods**, the higher level **Deployment** resource specifies how many replicas (pods) of our application will be created and is a simplistic way to configure scaling for the application.

> Note: To learn more about **Deployments** refer to this [documentation](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.14/applications/deployments/what-deployments-are.html).


## 3.1 - Reviewing the parksmap deployment

Let's start by confirming how many `replicas` we currently specify for our ParksMap application. We'll also use this exercise step to take a look at how all resources within OpenShift can be viewed and managed as [YAML](https://www.redhat.com/en/topics/automation/what-is-yaml) formatted text files which is extremely useful for more advanced automation and GitOps concepts. 

Start in the **Topology** view of the **Developer** perspective.

Click on your "Parksmap" application icon and click on the **D parksmap** deployment name at the top of the right hand panel.

From the **Deployment details** view we can click on the **YAML** tab and scroll down to confirm that we only specify `1` replica for the ParksMap application currently.

```yaml
spec:
  replicas: 1
```

<Zoom>
|![parksmap-replicas](/ocp-app-delivery-workshop/static/images/app-replicas.gif) | 
|:-------------------------------------------------------------------:|
| *ParksMap application deployment replicas*                          |
</Zoom>


## 3.2 - Intentionally crashing the application

With our ParksMap application only having one pod replica currently it will not be tolerant to failures. OpenShift will automatically restart the single pod if it encounters a failure, however during the time the application pod takes to start back up our users will not be able to access the application.

Let's see that in practice by intentionally causing an error in our application.

Start in the **Topology** view of the **Developer** perspective and click your Parksmap application icon.

In the **Resources** tab of the information pane open a second browser tab showing the ParksMap application **Route** that we explored in the previous exercise. The application should be running as normal.

Click on the pod name under the **Pods** header of the **Resources** tab and then click on the **Terminal** tab. This will open a terminal within our running ParksMap application container.

Inside the terminal run the following to intentionally crash the application:

```bash
kill 1 
```

The pod will automatically be restarted by OpenShift however if you refresh your second browser tab with the application **Route** you should be able to see the application is momentarily unavailable.

<Zoom>
|![parksmap-crash](/ocp-app-delivery-workshop/static/images/app-crash.gif) | 
|:-------------------------------------------------------------------:|
| *Intentionally crashing the ParksMap application*                   |
</Zoom>


## 3.3 - Scaling up the application

As a best practice, wherever possible we should try to run multiple replicas of our pods so that if one pod is unavailable our application will continue to be available to users.

Let's scale up our application and confirm it is now fault tolerant.

In the **Topology** view of the **Developer** perspective click your Parksmap application icon.

In the **Details** tab of the information pane click the **^ Increase the pod count** arrow to increase our replicas to `2`.  You will see the second pod starting up and becoming ready.

> Note: You can also scale the replicas of a deployment in automated and event driven fashions in response to factors like incoming traffic or resource consumption, or by using the `oc` cli for example `oc scale --replicas=2 deployment/parksmap`.

Once the new pod is ready, repeat the steps from task `3.2` to crash one of the pods. You should see that the application continues to serve traffic thanks to our OpenShift **Service** load balancing traffic to the second **Pod**.

<Zoom>
|![parksmap-scale](/ocp-app-delivery-workshop/static/images/app-scale.gif) | 
|:-------------------------------------------------------------------:|
| *Scaling up the ParksMap application*                               |
</Zoom>


## 3.4 - Self healing to desired state

In the previous example we saw what happened when we intentionally crashed our application. Let's see what happens if we just outright delete one of our ParksMap applications two **Pods**.

For this step we'll use the `oc` command line utility to build some more familiarity.

Let's start by launching back into our web terminal now by clicking the terminal button in the top right hand corner and then clicking **Start** with our `userX` project selected.

Once our terminal opens let's check our list of **Pods** with `oc get pods`. You should see something similar to the output below:

```bash
bash-4.4 ~ $ oc get pods
NAME                                         READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
parksmap-ff7477dc4-2nxd2                     1/1     Running   0          79s
parksmap-ff7477dc4-n26jl                     1/1     Running   0          31m
workspace45c88f4d4f2b4885-74b6d4898f-57dgh   2/2     Running   0          108s
```

Copy one of the pod names and delete it via `oc delete pods <podname>`, i.e `oc delete pod parksmap-ff7477dc4-2nxd2`.

```bash
bash-4.4 ~ $ oc delete pod parksmap-ff7477dc4-2nxd2
pod "parksmap-ff7477dc4-2nxd2" deleted
```

If we now run `oc get pods` again we will see a new **Pod** has automatically been created by OpenShift to replace the one we fully deleted. This is because OpenShift is a container orchestration engine that will always try and enforce the desired state that we declare.

In our ParksMap **Deployment** we have declared we always want two replicas of our application running at all times. Even if we (possibly accidentally) delete one, OpenShift will always attempt to self heal to return to our desired state.

Well done, you've finished exercise 3! 🎉

Commit message:

Add bonus objectives to some exercises.

data/workshop/exercise3.mdx, after:

---
title: Scaling and self-healing applications
exercise: 3
date: '2023-12-06'
tags: ['openshift','containers','kubernetes','deployments','autoscaling']
draft: false
authors: ['default']
summary: "Let's scale our application up 📈"
---

We have our application deployed, let's scale it up to make sure it will be resilient to failures.

While **Services** provide discovery and load balancing for **Pods**, the higher level **Deployment** resource specifies how many replicas (pods) of our application will be created and is a simplistic way to configure scaling for the application.

> Note: To learn more about **Deployments** refer to this [documentation](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.14/applications/deployments/what-deployments-are.html).


## 3.1 - Reviewing the parksmap deployment

Let's start by confirming how many `replicas` we currently specify for our ParksMap application. We'll also use this exercise step to take a look at how all resources within OpenShift can be viewed and managed as [YAML](https://www.redhat.com/en/topics/automation/what-is-yaml) formatted text files which is extremely useful for more advanced automation and GitOps concepts. 

Start in the **Topology** view of the **Developer** perspective.

Click on your "Parksmap" application icon and click on the **D parksmap** deployment name at the top of the right hand panel.

From the **Deployment details** view we can click on the **YAML** tab and scroll down to confirm that we only specify `1` replica for the ParksMap application currently.

```yaml
spec:
  replicas: 1
```

<Zoom>
|![parksmap-replicas](/ocp-app-delivery-workshop/static/images/app-replicas.gif) | 
|:-------------------------------------------------------------------:|
| *ParksMap application deployment replicas*                          |
</Zoom>


## 3.2 - Intentionally crashing the application

With our ParksMap application only having one pod replica currently it will not be tolerant to failures. OpenShift will automatically restart the single pod if it encounters a failure, however during the time the application pod takes to start back up our users will not be able to access the application.

Let's see that in practice by intentionally causing an error in our application.

Start in the **Topology** view of the **Developer** perspective and click your Parksmap application icon.

In the **Resources** tab of the information pane open a second browser tab showing the ParksMap application **Route** that we explored in the previous exercise. The application should be running as normal.

Click on the pod name under the **Pods** header of the **Resources** tab and then click on the **Terminal** tab. This will open a terminal within our running ParksMap application container.

Inside the terminal run the following to intentionally crash the application:

```bash
kill 1 
```

The pod will automatically be restarted by OpenShift however if you refresh your second browser tab with the application **Route** you should be able to see the application is momentarily unavailable.

<Zoom>
|![parksmap-crash](/ocp-app-delivery-workshop/static/images/app-crash.gif) | 
|:-------------------------------------------------------------------:|
| *Intentionally crashing the ParksMap application*                   |
</Zoom>


## 3.3 - Scaling up the application

As a best practice, wherever possible we should try to run multiple replicas of our pods so that if one pod is unavailable our application will continue to be available to users.

Let's scale up our application and confirm it is now fault tolerant.

In the **Topology** view of the **Developer** perspective click your Parksmap application icon.

In the **Details** tab of the information pane click the **^ Increase the pod count** arrow to increase our replicas to `2`.  You will see the second pod starting up and becoming ready.

> Note: You can also scale the replicas of a deployment in automated and event driven fashions in response to factors like incoming traffic or resource consumption, or by using the `oc` cli for example `oc scale --replicas=2 deployment/parksmap`.

Once the new pod is ready, repeat the steps from task `3.2` to crash one of the pods. You should see that the application continues to serve traffic thanks to our OpenShift **Service** load balancing traffic to the second **Pod**.

<Zoom>
|![parksmap-scale](/ocp-app-delivery-workshop/static/images/app-scale.gif) | 
|:-------------------------------------------------------------------:|
| *Scaling up the ParksMap application*                               |
</Zoom>


## 3.4 - Self healing to desired state

In the previous example we saw what happened when we intentionally crashed our application. Let's see what happens if we just outright delete one of our ParksMap applications two **Pods**.

For this step we'll use the `oc` command line utility to build some more familiarity.

Let's start by launching back into our web terminal now by clicking the terminal button in the top right hand corner and then clicking **Start** with our `userX` project selected.

Once our terminal opens let's check our list of **Pods** with `oc get pods`. You should see something similar to the output below:

```bash
bash-4.4 ~ $ oc get pods
NAME                                         READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
parksmap-ff7477dc4-2nxd2                     1/1     Running   0          79s
parksmap-ff7477dc4-n26jl                     1/1     Running   0          31m
workspace45c88f4d4f2b4885-74b6d4898f-57dgh   2/2     Running   0          108s
```

Copy one of the pod names and delete it via `oc delete pods <podname>`, i.e `oc delete pod parksmap-ff7477dc4-2nxd2`.

```bash
bash-4.4 ~ $ oc delete pod parksmap-ff7477dc4-2nxd2
pod "parksmap-ff7477dc4-2nxd2" deleted
```

If we now run `oc get pods` again we will see a new **Pod** has automatically been created by OpenShift to replace the one we fully deleted. This is because OpenShift is a container orchestration engine that will always try and enforce the desired state that we declare.

In our ParksMap **Deployment** we have declared we always want two replicas of our application running at all times. Even if we (possibly accidentally) delete one, OpenShift will always attempt to self heal to return to our desired state.

## 3.5 - Bonus objective: Autoscaling

If you have time, take a while to explore the concepts of [HorizontalPodAutoscaling](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.14/nodes/pods/nodes-pods-autoscaling.html), [VerticalPodAutoscaling](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.14/nodes/pods/nodes-pods-vertical-autoscaler.html) and [Cluster autoscaling](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.14/machine_management/applying-autoscaling.html).


Well done, you've finished exercise 3! 🎉
