data/workshop/exercise1.mdx, before:

---
title: Understanding our lab environment
exercise: 1
date: '2024-08-22'
tags: ['openshift','containers','kubernetes','disconnected']
draft: false
authors: ['default']
summary: "Let's get familiar with our lab setup."
---

Welcome to the OpenShift 4 Disconnected security & compliance workshop! Here you'll learn about operating a secure and compliant OpenShift 4 cluster in a disconnected network using the following key OpenShift features:

- [Red Hat Advanced Cluster Security](https://www.redhat.com/en/technologies/cloud-computing/openshift/advanced-cluster-security-kubernetes)
- [Red Hat OpenShift Compliance Operator](https://www.redhat.com/en/blog/a-guide-to-openshift-compliance-operator-best-practices)
- [Red Hat Developer Hub](https://developers.redhat.com/rhdh/overview)

To level set, [Red Hat OpenShift](https://www.redhat.com/en/technologies/cloud-computing/openshift) is a unified platform to build, modernize, and deploy applications at scale. OpenShift supports running in disconnected networks, though this does change the way the cluster operates because key ingredients like container images, operator bundles, and helm charts must be brought into the environment from the outside world via mirroring.

There are of course many different options for installing OpenShift in a restricted network; this workshop will not cover the deployment of a cluster, instead you will have an existing installed cluster allocated to you which has been created in advance. Your tasks during this workshop will be to improve the security and compliance of the cluster and workloads running on it.

**Let's get started!**


## 1.1 - Reserve a lab environment

An OpenShift `4.14` cluster has already been provisioned for you to complete these excercises. To reserve an environment go to [insert link here](https://sheets.google.com).

<Zoom>
|![workshop](/static/images/compliance/environments.png)                        |
|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------:|
| *Workshop environment worksheet*                                              |
</Zoom>


## 1.2 - Login via ssh and vnc

To complete the lab exercises you'll use a mix of an `ssh` terminal session for running OpenShift client `oc` commands, and then a browser based vnc session in order to access the OpenShift cluster web console.

Links to a browser based terminal and vnc session are available in the spreadsheet, along with any credentials required. You are welcome to use your own terminal or vnc software if you prefer.

Once you have both a terminal and vnc session working you're ready to get underway with the workshop, please move on to exercise 2 🚀

Commit message:

Update site metadata and polish some exercises.

data/workshop/exercise1.mdx, after:

---
title: Understanding our lab environment
exercise: 1
date: '2024-08-22'
tags: ['openshift','containers','kubernetes','disconnected']
draft: false
authors: ['default']
summary: "Let's get familiar with our lab setup."
---

Welcome to the OpenShift 4 Disconnected security & compliance workshop! Here you'll learn about operating a secure and compliant OpenShift 4 cluster in a disconnected network using the following key OpenShift features:

- [Red Hat Advanced Cluster Security](https://www.redhat.com/en/technologies/cloud-computing/openshift/advanced-cluster-security-kubernetes)
- [Red Hat OpenShift Compliance Operator](https://www.redhat.com/en/blog/a-guide-to-openshift-compliance-operator-best-practices)

To level set, [Red Hat OpenShift](https://www.redhat.com/en/technologies/cloud-computing/openshift) is a unified platform to build, modernize, and deploy applications at scale. OpenShift supports running in disconnected networks, though this does change the way the cluster operates because key ingredients like container images, operator bundles, and helm charts must be brought into the environment from the outside world via mirroring.

There are of course many different options for installing OpenShift in a restricted network; this workshop will not cover the deployment of a cluster, instead you will have an existing installed cluster allocated to you which has been created in advance. Your tasks during this workshop will be to improve the security and compliance of the cluster and workloads running on it.

**Let's get started!**


## 1.1 - Reserve a lab environment

An OpenShift `4.14` cluster has already been provisioned for you to complete these excercises. To reserve an environment go to [this Google Sheets spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1tddgRA6suefTaITyRx87IoRCfCJ7El9Hdr6HB8K7Mvo/edit?usp=sharing). Update your name next to an `Available` environment and change the status to `Allocated`.

<Zoom>
|![workshop](/static/images/compliance/environments.png)                        |
|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------:|
| *Workshop environment worksheet*                                              |
</Zoom>


## 1.2 - Login via ssh and vnc

To complete the lab exercises you'll use a mix of an `ssh` terminal session for running OpenShift client `oc` commands, and then a browser based vnc session in order to access the OpenShift cluster web console.

Links to a browser based terminal and vnc session are available in the spreadsheet, along with any credentials required. You are welcome to use your own terminal or vnc software if you prefer.

Once you have both a terminal and vnc session working you're ready to get underway with the workshop, please move on to exercise 2 🚀
